welcome everybody to our ongoing
edge of mind podcast where i have the
great honor and delight to
spend a little bit more time with this
remarkable
thinker
psychonaut explorer of the mind and
heart um christopher beige
and really continue to unpack unfold
some of the many
aspects of his remarkable journey that
we introduced in round one of my
conversation and so
um i will reiterate a very brief
bio of chris and then we're just going
to jump right in
and slowly venture into um hopefully
some rich deep waters so uh christopher
beige is a professor emeritus
in the department of philosophy and
religious studies at youngstown state
university where he taught for 33 years
a fellow at the institute of nomadic
sciences he was also adjunct faculty at
the california institute
of integral studies and on the advisory
board for graft transpersonal training
and the graf foundation
an award-winning teacher international
speaker who's the author of three books
and lives in portland and you're still
in portland right
actually we're in weaverville north
carolina now just oh okay well i'm glad
i asked yeah yeah so chris thank you
again for for taking time to
return um and unfold with me some of the
remarkable implications of your your
journey so at the outset deep out of
gratitude for you
it's a pleasure to be with you today
andrew thank you for the invitation yeah
really i i deeply appreciate it and so
what i thought what we could explore
is i was rereading some of the material
especially the latter type of chapters
in your journey
lsd in the mind of the universe that's
mostly what we're going to be unfolding
but also conjoined
with the living classroom because
there's obviously some wonderful
interconnectivity between those
narratives that will be woven into this
but i thought what we could we could
introduce is um a narrative a topic
that's very near and dear to my heart
right now
so much so that i'm writing one book on
it and probably two and i think we
pinged on this just a wee bit in our
first session but i want to explore it
in a little bit more detail now because
um to me i think using your languaging
it this this narrative of openness and
contraction
is really i've i've come to see it as
kind of the combustion cycle of the
spiritual path
and so i thought we could start with
that narrative as a way to perhaps like
a like a fractal
reiterate the entirety of your journey
within the session itself in other words
start
a little bit more with this narrative
and maybe continue
to expand to open into deeper and deeper
dimensions as in fact your journey
both during the 20 years and after um
took you through as a way to really uh
talk both in a kind of philosophical
and also and the reason i love these
um terms
sense i love the notion of of openness
and contraction because these are things
we can feel i mean they're not just
cerebral intellectual
storylines these are things that we can
feel on our body mind matrix and so
um i i would like to dive into that with
you
as we perhaps
um set our direction towards what i
consider to be the
the climax of your book the the diamond
luminosity but because that light is so
bright
that space is so open
that we perhaps can dilate the aperture
of our awareness our hearts and minds a
little bit more slowly
and start by
sending a question
in your direction
about how this
uh your journey could be articulated
in this expression this kind of
pulsation or the hindus talk about it
beautifully in the tradition of spanda
the doctrine of vibration
which i'm starting to see now and i'll
share some of my own experiences and
insights of openness
contraction openness and then
contraction
so maybe we could start there and then
that i think will lend us um gradually
into wider and wider and perhaps you
know greater degrees of openness okay
you bet that's a good place to start
so in my understanding in my experience
psychedelics in general and in
particular lsd which was my primary
medicine in this journey
is an amplifier of consciousness
and so when consciousness is amplified
uh signals which are quiet get large get
loud
and you have a sensation of your
becoming aware of more and more
how you meet that increase of awareness
how you engage what emerges
is seminal in the process if you
uh engage the shadow consciously
you confront those things which keep you
habitually contracted and small
you engage those fears or whatever it is
you take them to their source to the
root
they resolve themselves and when they
resolve themselves your consciousness is
free to open into more spacious places
every time you let go of something
which is holding your consciousness in a
fixed pattern or holding it small
particularly initially your
your time space identity your historical
egoic identity
that tells us who we are but if you can
let go of that you discover that there
are these dimensions beyond your time
space identity which are even more truly
really what you are
and if you keep this going you go
through multiple layers of consciousness
there's a point where
you have to let go surrender or die not
only to your individual identity
but to your identity as a human being
per se there is a deeper sense of
humanity
that defines
that holds the limits of your knowing
and there's a going even deeper there's
a sense of
time-space identity you you let go of
your entire existence
including all your reincarnational
experiences
of time space as a framework for holding
experience and your experience flows
beyond time and space
and this is an entirely natural process
i think
thought of as a broader
conjecture my understanding of what
happens inside a psychedelic session
is that it basically accelerates and
intensifies what is taking place in
nature all the time
so when we
are born
our consciousness contracts into our an
individual egoic time space identity
when we die we expand there's a sense of
expanding back into the souls back back
into deeper spiritual awareness when
we're born we contract when we die we
expand
and so what happens in a session
it simply accelerates and intensifies
this natural process which is taking
place
in history over a longer period so what
it allows you to do
is to accelerate that process
and to
start by
burning off more karma than one might
get around to
otherwise that's the same thing that
happens in meditation of course too
same dynamic
and it's interesting isn't it my
favorite running definition of of
meditation these days
um is habituation to openness
um and i find it there's so many
implications to that chris because i
mean parenthetically
the buddha
we know etymologically usually
translated as the awakened one but i've
also heard renderings as the opened one
and so the reason i find this beautiful
for a number of reasons is
in country distinction we're the
contracted ones
and so by by bringing this the reason i
think this is so important is because by
bringing this process this phenomenology
into the light of our conscious
awareness
we can better sensitize ourselves to it
in a more um somatic sense it's against
something this is something we can feel
this is not just a cerebral intellectual
um
thing we we can feel this process of
contraction and openness within our very
so much
and and for me what i'm curious chris is
two things one
how early in your journey did this
become apparent to you i mean how i i
can't remember all your sessions with
great specificity but where did this
narrative
become identifiable for you
how did it help you as you continue to
go further and then um parenthetically
just so i don't forget this as well
the other thing i find around this
narrative that's so helpful that you
were suggesting at the outset
is that
we're practicing this whether we know it
or not we're we are either on the path
of practicing habituation to openness or
if we don't know it and most of us don't
by default
we're practicing contraction
every time we capitulate to grasping to
beliefs to a sense of i mean virtually
everywhere
that is our default contraction and so
again i know i'm throwing a couple
things out there but i think this is so
foundational for me
that after decades when i look back it's
like oh my gosh i can really look
with a new sense of understanding from
this altitude
wow my whole journey has been this kind
of pulsation opening expanding how much
of that can i deal then metabolizing
contracting so a little bit around that
a little bit more on that sure
it actually started in the very first
session
in my very first session
i hit an experience where
i could not remember anything about
myself i could not remember who i was
what i was i couldn't remember what i
did for a living i could not remember
whether i was a man or a woman i was
absolutely jammed and i looked in a
thousand mirrors i couldn't find any
piece of individual egoic identity
and it was of course very jarring
frightening in the beginning and then
later in the session my sense of
identity returned but it that experience
was really important because it told me
at first it gave me an
insight into the dynamic
it shook me up and it showed me a
certain measure of the true cost you
know because i had read about ego death
and i thought oh good let's do it
and i hadn't appreciated this is a true
death this is a loss of your identity
um and it basically
um taught me to the art of letting go
and the art of surrender because if you
can't control
your self-identity identity
and that's about as basic as it gets
and so later when the ante kept
increasing
uh
i knew that the key to navigating
whatever was coming was to surrender let
it go and it it stopped me from trying
to hold on to something familiar hold on
something i could identify with
and that just then that just went on it
escalated from there about
two and a half years later when my
individual egoic identity was turned
inside out and just crushed
i went through a collapse of that
smaller state
and they rebirth into a deeper state and
then later and through after the ocean
of suffering after spending two years
in that you know surrounded by the
historical suffering of humanity and
these unfinished memories painful
memories
there was a death process which then
catapulted me into
a deeper level of reality beyond the
collective unconscious into archetypal
consciousness and this pattern just kept
repeating itself
so but it started very early on
and then
then it's just
the texture of the openness differs the
context differs the purity of it differs
there's a lot of light of course
engaging
in fields of light but i found that
light itself also
has gradients
they're various kind of levels of purity
of light levels of clarity of light
and so
the the actual content of openness
is it changes
in the work but the phenomenon
that of
opening into something larger something
deeper
now now i want to
caution this a little bit
qualify it the sensation and the certain
stages of work and what i would call the
psychic and subtle levels of
consciousness the sensation often is of
getting larger
and i think this is characteristic of
subtle level reality some level of
states of consciousness
and then later
much later in the journey
this experience was just reversed
that is i i was experiencing huge feels
of light contracting yeah into the
present and just
exploding me into that into some
different state of consciousness but
everything was contracting contracting
so
i began to realize that the whole
subject i even began to wonder whether
we had mis identified
the nature of psycho psychedelics by
calling them mind openers yeah i
understand but at another level they are
mon mind contractors where you're
contracting deeper and deeper and deeper
into the present present present present
until you drop into a very different
experience of that present so
openness
we we just want to be careful to
recognize that there is a there are
different modalities
it's it's a multi isn't it chris it's a
multivalent term right it has it has um
different iterations and context and
several things come to mind here
that's the contraction into the present
moment it's very interesting in a
languaging that i'm familiar with and
you may be familiar with this too papa
sambaba talked about it as the fourth
moment
which one can only actually access
through the conduit of the present
moment so what an interesting
kind of juxtaposition and almost clash
of traditional um approaches where on
one level
by contracting in the healthy sense and
again this is i think super important
because in in and of itself contraction
is utterly non-problematic we we
couldn't operate in the world without
that aspect of that pulsation and so we
tend to
clamor towards openness as that somehow
being the ultimate spiritual thing i
think provisionally there's some truth
to that but if we can't
merge that openness with a contraction
then contraction becomes the bad boy the
bad girl and we look at it in kind of a
limited way but
in my experience in padmasambhava use
this language of the fourth moment you
contract you condense into the portal
the it becomes the portico into
the timeless beyond where you come to
the present moment and then that blows
up so to speak um into the fourth moment
which transcends even the present moment
itself and i think that's helpful
because
we're going to start the tread into
waters where languages will because it's
dualistic and nature becomes problematic
and as you know in the buddhist
tradition
one has to be or is invited to be
incredibly articulate precise in order
to realize when we use this term exactly
how we're using it in what context and
so i think therefore it seems like well
wait a second isn't the whole thing
about opening
well yes but it's also honoring the the
process of contraction and how that can
then lead to this yeah you know you're
mentioning padma zambawa gives me an
opportunity to once again emphasize the
point
that uh there are correlations and i'm
grateful for the correlations between
my experiences and those recorded by the
great beings the padma zambawas of the
world the great contemplatives
but
this path that i was on is not that
contemplative path
it's a path of temporary immersion so
when i'm describing things it always has
to be understood that this is a
temporary experience
which
then to unpack the spiritual
potential of that temporary experience
you know we can have that conversation
but it's it's not the same as when you
come into these experiences
using what you might think of as the
slow bake method
of sustained contemplation you know so i
just always want to be careful to keep
apples and oranges separate and uh
because so many people
good point they think oh i've had a
tremendous
revelatory enlightenment experience and
that's you know it says well good for
you but
but that's it's that's a temporary
experience that is
unbelievably important i mean how does
the saying go
an enlightened experience does not make
one an enlightened being i mean that's
as you know that's a difference in that
language in between experience and
realization by definition
yeah experience always has a beginning
and an end yeah and in order to mature
that and that's very interesting because
that's a large part of the pathway i
think a lot of people really get tripped
up i speak from my own experience you
have these
tremendous metanoias these openings
you think you're enlightened
and then what do you do you grasp after
that and you just replace the chain made
of lead with one made of gold and so
yeah therefore understanding that
there's there's the path quality of
continuing that and so just to reinstate
a couple things when you're talking
about
deeper states
just to make sure i'm understanding you
chris
it seems to me that you're also saying a
deeper state is is somewhat synonymous
with them with a more open state
that is you're waking in
you're also expanding and then and then
perhaps as you pointed out that
that it then
points or um
directs to us how it is that we're
constructing
this self-sense moment-to-moment this is
the other thing i think that is
incredibly important
that we we tend and i'm speaking from
like confessional thing we tend to think
that the ego structure the self-sense is
this monolithic reified entity
and this is where we can learn a lot
from our scientific brothers and sisters
in science uh physics and neuroscience
it's a it's a process it's not a product
the self-sense is constantly being
constructed
and therefore when you go through this
type of deconstruction or demolition
derby
by immediate implication you can see
through the process of demolition the
process of construction and therefore
how we are responsible for the way we
contract and we do so largely for
purposes of
protection fear and the like but is that
is that a fair representation of what
you discovered
it is it's it's a fair representation
and
it's a way it's a description
which fits better in some ways the early
stages of the work where you are still
kind of working
at
um
insights which help you understand your
individual
way of being in the world
and then
you know i describe my work
fundamentally as a work in cosmological
exploration
where not only do you leave your
individual ego behind you know at least
temporarily
and you leave
but
you leave deeper and deeper levels
behind at least in my experience and are
given the opportunity to explore
um
how the universe constructs its reality
how archetypal reality structures time
and space reality
how
oneness manifests in the diversity of
all physical of all life forms of all
atomic nuclear quantum life forms uh how
the pure void of emptiness
is that mysterious fertile essence which
is giving birth to time and space
i mean the vast you know
the vastness of time and space moment by
moment minute by minute so
it is
you know very useful to understand your
personal
way of contracting the personal way of
you know sustaining your smallness but
for me uh i mean not trained as a
philosopher i wanted to understand the
larger
spectrum of reality and so
the invitation that that was given to me
was
just to explore how time and space is
made
and i wish i mean i so often wish i had
a phd in
physics and astrophysics i mean i could
have understood so much more of what i
was being shown
but you know
always the universe can only
communicate to you
successfully that which you have the
capacity to understand yes exactly oh
that's a what a fantastic statement
chris because to me it's like and this
is what you suggest towards the
interview book
when you were
wrestling struggling working with this
process of integration how in a very
real way
you
using this particular mechanism
disintegrated
opened open opened and then and then
really in my languaging here um
using frameworks that we're both
familiar with that this notion of
in the indict traditions this
pedagogical approach i think we might
have hit it on last session of
of hearing contemplating meditating
my languaging ingest digest
metabolize and what the way i read your
experience
that i think is really worth talking
about
is that
you you open to such an extent and i can
speak a little bit from my own
experience
that then the issue became one of of
digestion and metabolism and and the
reason i mentioned this that i think has
tremendous applicability
is that sometimes when we look at things
like psychosis and you were treading
sometimes that thin membrane between
transcendence and in psychosis the loss
of self-sense
that the the issue of integration
bringing that in in a certain way and
part of my kind of play on languaging
here
is that
um psychosis can be in fact a type of
eating disorder
that you actually open to such an extent
that then you you actually don't have
the capacity you don't have the
infrastructure the wherewithal to digest
and metabolize and then instead of
opening body mind you blow body mind and
sense of reference is then completely so
decimated that that is one way to
perhaps talk about the whole psychotic
aspect and the risk perhaps some of the
perils of doing this type of deep diving
i understand and you're certainly right
that doing this type of work does carry
certain risks and has to be approached
cautiously and uh with
careful uh support structures in place
and careful self-monitoring and so on
and so forth i don't think and i do
understand uh the relationship between
psychosis and transcendence and i think
it was that houston smith who said
uh a mystic is someone who learns how to
swim in the waters in the vast waters
and the psychotic drowns that it's like
actually
artie lange
in my case
i understand the psychotic looking
qualities of loss of self that but
i i would not ever i would not describe
my experience as walking that particular
edge
and if i had gotten into a situation
where i felt i was at that edge i would
have changed course i would have done
something differently
my experience was that by working in a
very carefully
clinical type
modality
and opening systematically
the universe really opened me
systematically in a way beyond my
calculation but it opened me very very
carefully and so it peeled me
carefully and it broke me open layer by
layer by layer if it had catapulted me
you know beyond beyond beyond so quickly
then i could have had problems
integration but in my experience i
always uh opened and i always congealed
comfortably and carefully and if i had
not congealed comfortably and carefully
then i would have been given pause
because that's a symptom of something
really going wrong so it's not the depth
of
loss of self which marks the psychotic
episode i think it also has to do with a
kind of confusion
but i absolutely agree you have to walk
these waters very carefully i seem to
have a kind of a natural constitution i
mean
you know i started this work i never
came from any traumatized background
just the ordinary you know pains of
growing up and whatnot but i i had
fundamentally a core strong self
um and
i also had a capacity
it's in my natal astrological natal
chart a capacity to open and an interest
in opening up into the vast expanse of
consciousness and to con contract back
so if if you don't have that natural
capacity or if you're bringing in
disruptive trauma or other qualities in
your person
then
very much this work may not be for you
you know it's it's a little bit like
jack angler famously said and i think
it's appropriate statement you have to
be someone before you can be no one
that's right they're they're i think
that cannot be overstated that they're
the ego itself fundamentally is
non-problematic it's a developmental
stage it's just a form of arrested
development and so if you don't have
that stable self-sense
then in fact then instead of dis
differentiating you dissociate and then
that's where it becomes somewhat
problematic then the ability to find
that identity to find some refuge
becomes really somewhat disconcerting
but chris towards the end of your book
um
i want to come back to this just a
little bit because my understanding of
what you're sharing towards the end like
what
what dictated stopping after the 73rd
journey
was and i found this one on the most
compelling um
pardon the pun electrifying parts of
your book where it was it was as if your
body mind matrix had become so open and
we talked about this last time this is
so important
this kind of tantric work body is as
important as mine when you're opening
your mind you are opening your body and
as you open your body even the classic
inner yogic sense all these energies
what they talk about is the winds come
through
and if those winds aren't ridden
properly
they can throw you and so if i
understand what you said towards the end
in a certain way your system was running
too hot there was so much energy so much
release
that again this is this returns us to
this digestion in a metabolism component
it was like my cup runneth over i have i
have enough experience here to spend the
rest of this life or other lives now
digesting this feast
yeah and so is it isn't that a fair way
to recapitulate what you said at the end
that you stopped the feast because there
was just too much to eat
i think i think that's a fair
description um
in my case i don't i think it's not
because i didn't ride the wind
successfully i think i rode the wind
successfully but i rode the winds too
long in the sense i mean they were just
they would stretch me out so so wide and
so deep
and i think this is
um you know in the early stages of
psychedelic use both individually and i
think culturally we get excited by
having being able to have contact with
the transcendent dimensions and that's
so liberating and it's so intellectually
you know opening to us to the
intelligence that lives in the universe
that is the universe
um
but
our
our tradition is our theological and
even our contemplative traditions i
think tend to
except at the very highest levels tend
to underestimate
the dimensions of the divine or
underestimate the dimensions of the
universe so that leads us to
underestimate
how vast the world is that we can open
into
psychedelics do give us the capacity
even when they are used well and i i
hope i use them skillfully and
responsibly but even when i did that
it basically opened me so deeply into
such intimacy with the universe
transcending time transcending space
and even though i contracted back okay
the memory yeah the beauty the memory of
the communion was just so
dear and so
um
intense
that uh i could not i could not take
return and coming back i just couldn't
do it anymore
uh yeah you couldn't you couldn't go to
the train station and leave your lover
one more time right yeah yeah and i just
i just had to stay here okay and uh let
her come to me in whatever form was
possible by me
not going into a non-ordinary state but
staying here
and letting
and just digesting like you said i i
picked up a lifetime and more of
experiences to to digest and so let me
ask you this and i hope it's okay if we
go in into some i mean the book itself
is so intimate it's so personal that i
don't think i'm violating
um any borders with you but if if i go
into areas where it's like yeah i don't
want to go there you will not offend me
okay but but what you said at the end
so much was any of the book i was really
moved by this because
in a certain way when i look back over
my own life chris
it became more articulate over the last
couple years my entire life has been
as a way learning how to prepare to die
i mean i wrote a book by their title and
in in the most elegant way that journey
has actually brought me more fully into
life than i could have imagined so my
passion for death is that has actually
brought me more fully into life than i
could have possibly imagined
so i have a deep
deep fascination interest in death dying
thanatology
to me really the whole spiritual path is
death in slow motion opening titrating
opening on our terms but will you say
our share at the end i thought was so
beautiful just to expand we said here
that
i in a certain way i couldn't wait to
die
that i i couldn't wait to return to my
beloved but let me let me ask you this
how do you think why what do you expect
will happen and why do you think somehow
you'll be more prepared for her ultimate
embrace
with the dissolution of your body at the
moment to death than you are now i mean
are you perhaps again i don't know
kidding yourself it's a very open
question what is the intuition or the
felt scent that says i can't wait to
dissolve into the embrace of the beloved
at the moment of death
and then why why do you think you'll be
able to handle that any differently than
you can handle it now
i don't think i would handle it
differently
at the moment of my final death whenever
that takes place then i could handle it
now i think if i were to die right now
the training that i went through in my
psychedelic work
and it is just as you say it it is a
training to die
and that training actually becomes a
training in how to live because
you know
that there's like two realities in the
world there's a domain of light i think
of it as just pure light and then
there's the green reality which is
manifest physical world which is the
world of of you know
the world that we are part of near
monaco so there's dharmakaya and near
monacaia and they they are
interpenetrating they are the same
reality experienced in different
modalities
and what we experience as death is
really just a a
an intersection of a moment of
intersection between these realities and
as you awaken
you don't
you awaken into a deeper into the fact
of the constant
intersection the constant simultaneity
of these realities so
what happens when we die physically and
what happens when we die spiritually are
really deeply one in the same in a way
and i feel like in my sessions
i went through i was taken into my own
death process multiple times i i can't
really count how many times i died
and so i have a sense that i know the
pathway well
i read the literature about the bardo
confusions that can distract us and
prevent us from returning fully to
dharmakaya when we die
and i recognize that and i have
i feel like i've dealt
with many of those and i
i
i may be wrong
you know we'll find out yeah find out
the final exam right yeah but i have a
sense that uh to me
death is will be uh not only joyful
as it is for everybody
but easy yeah uh because i i don't feel
a deep clinging
to
not only my personal identity but i
don't feel a deep clinging to human
existence or to time space
um so
and you're absolutely right all
spiritual practice and i think of
psychedelic practice as i try to do it
as a spiritual practice you know a
session i call them sessions not true
a period of spiritual practice
yeah um
they are preparing you for that moment
of death and if everything goes well
yeah you do get to die before you die
remember those who die before they die
do not die when they die so that
what would be lovely if i could
experience what i think of as full
liberation would be if she came to me
while i was still in my body
and i got to live in the death state
yes i was alive in the physical state
that's so beautiful and this is so
important
this this view alone
can
irrevocably radically alter our
relationship to the end of life and
transitioning and by the way we should
make a deal with each other chris when i
was reading your book i thought of the
same thing
that
both the use of of the word psychedelic
and death i think
these are branding issues we need to
rebrand these terms so every time i read
psychedelic it was like impressed by
this ridiculous conditioned button to
that word and so i'm somewhat playing
here but you should replace every
instance of psychedelic with entheogen
i should replace in my work of death and
dying i'm really going to actively try
to do this because death is such a
reified ridiculous notion
i'm going to do my best to every time i
use that word as mindfulness to speech
replace it with the word transition
because otherwise death seems so final
it's so solid and it's like this
terrible monolithic thing yeah but no
it's not you know what marie curie said
beautifully he said
nothing in life is to be feared it is
only to be understood yeah and so what
we're doing here is this tremendous
understanding so i want to talk a little
bit about this because this is so
important for us well let me before we
go in the next yeah let me just
respond to something you said okay one
of the things that i write about in the
book in the diamond luminosity chapter
is
once you've died so many times and at so
many levels of consciousness the very
concept of death loses its meaning
because you you learn you cannot die
yeah the form you are can die everything
about all your understandings and all
your
history can die
but you cannot die yeah and at that
point you know in in that diamond
luminosity chapter
when i made my first transition into the
diamond luminosity the name of that
chapter i gave that is the death state
and the song
which i sung in that chapter you know my
my
if you what we would usually call the
the song of realization
was the death state you know and it the
death state is the awakened state it is
the it is the reality state
um
yeah
you're the very impression this is
exactly the question i was going to ask
you um that when you went through these
repetitive
openings releases
and deaths
it became easier
in fact you became more familiar with it
right the very tibetan word for
meditation to become familiar with
so it's only because again we don't
we're not we don't understand it we're
not familiar with it hence we fear it
and so you die over and over and over
you become more familiar with it you
understand it you befriend it and you go
oh my gosh this is just this natural
state of openness that is only
fearful
in reference to the ego structure to the
form which we're exclusively identified
with that we're so afraid of letting go
of so just i want to reinstate this
yeah because it's just so important it
becomes easier the more frequently you
die in meditation or through these
sashings or whatever the more familiar
you get with it until it becomes like
his online his kamapa said
at the moment his transition in this
beautiful interview
two days before he died nothing happens
nothing happened to get to that point to
say with utter conviction
nothing happens
yeah unbelievable yeah yeah death
becomes your best friend
truly it becomes your best friend in
your practice you're always looking for
your best friend
now i just want to qualify
again a little bit just okay so the
unusual scope
though the hardest strip down that i
went through in any of my sessions the
most extreme
you know destruction of
was in the 70th session in the last the
what i consider the last vision i was
given in among many major visions
and so
uh at
one level earlier and i had gone through
so many deaths and they do get easier
and you look forward to them and your
embrace them and so on and so forth and
yet i have to put that beside this
particular phenomenon where the
transition was not easy i i didn't
resist it i gave into it but it was
really extreme and
that's because
my session or the consciousness guiding
my session was taking me into an
extremely radical state of consciousness
that was deeper into deep time than it
had ever taken me before it was giving
me one last
culminating
series of teachings
that required an unusually large canvas
and so it had nothing to do with
personal
enlightenment or personal ego death or
something like that so once again um
we always have to
contextualize all of our observations in
terms of the level of consciousness that
we're working with but in general i
think you're absolutely right the more
you die the more comfortable you get
with it but and
and to be able to say
as the karmapa did nothing nothing
happens
is to be
uh in a cherished cherished state isn't
it yeah and if we really understand that
again returning to the narrative the
contraction openness narrative if we
truly understand and feel in our in our
heart of hearts
that when we die it's the ultimate grand
opening right there we go it's the grand
opening and if we understand that these
are little miniature openings we become
more familiar with those in our
meditation state i mean how much of the
path is letting go of identification to
thought to body to exclusive
identification with form
it is absolutely death in slow motion
and therefore towards the end of the
life
then we really actually have like you
said it's a complete reversal of our
normal fear now we actually have
something to look forward to instead of
going into the bardos looking through
the rear view mirror that's what makes
everything so painful
we actually now have something to look
forward to is the big
unwind the big unwind the final
exhalation the final openness
which is absolutely fundamentally
ecstatic it's this release into the into
the beloved and so like this is so
important and i love your languaging
here
of the return to the beloved um because
if we have um this again in our heart of
hearts if we know
that we are going to return to the
embrace of the beloved you're going to
return to your lover at the moment to
death and be held in this ultimate
holding environment
oh my goodness does that change our
relationship to the end of life i am
going to return to the embrace of the
cosmic mother
wow these are then you die as a sinner
with a smile on your face instead of
kicking and screaming and and making a
really difficult transition so this
cannot in my opinion be overstated
because this will
radically change the way we relate to
old age sickness as i look down and this
apparatus has served me pretty well for
decades is starting to crumble yeah
instead of oh crap it's oh wow yeah it's
like whatever yeah
it's the one wonderful
joy and
mercy of life that they it can't stop
you from dying
you know it's like the older you get
every you get one foot closer to joy and
ecstasy and the whole attempt to you
know cryogenics to not die and to freeze
the body that's just sort of so sad i
mean it's just so terribly sad and and
it's not
you know yeah it's such that's why you
know i taught near-death episode
research for years in my courses along
with reincarnation research and other
things and over and over and over again
when students
when i went with students through this
wonderful literature and they watched
how those people's lives were totally
changed their relationship to death was
totally changed by their temporary
experience of what's on the other side
of death and having experienced the
beloved in their own form of the beloved
that had an experience of softening
permanently
their own fear of death and changing
their expectations so this is you know
this death research uh is really really
a powerful psycho spiritual work i i
couldn't agree more the work of of
grayson and
evan alexander and others who come back
with these really remarkable stories and
i think
this also is worth reinstating that
i i believe it's like i've never had an
official nde but i've had what i call
meditative ndes
and
to me it's like you don't have to have
these over and over for them to change
your life you just need one
and it's because and i wonder if this
resonates with you it's because they're
so true
they're so real
that it just takes one to completely
change the texture of your life and this
is as you know um they are using these
agents now to remove
fear of death for people who are just
terrified one sashing one session will
completely open you to the point where
all fear of death is done and over with
that's no small gift as you say
it
people say well how do you know what you
whether what you experienced was real
maybe it was just a complicated
hallucination or self-fulfilling
prophecy and it's like no
you know what reality feels like and
this is more real than the physical real
it is a hyper reality it's just its
objectivity is unmistakable yeah and you
don't have to you don't can't quibble
with it don't need to argue with it
don't need to question
it's just
it's obviously true exactly and then
really again come back and come back to
the contraction thing
it is in fact egos ego's inability
to digest metabolize that
that then contracts against it and
fights against it um it's a type of uh
reducing that by i love huxley what
huxley said the brain
reducing valve that and on one level we
need it because it's like you said we we
don't have the capacity
to be developmentally that open and so
we on one level we need this type of
reduction in order to survive but really
i would argue that's what constitutes
growth is reducing the reducing valve
continuing to open until we can actually
um
become
this ultimate openness and this and in
that sense become the cosmos itself and
so this ties into what we're talking
about last time that i love what you
thought about this
that
in order to become i don't remember your
exact terms but something like in order
to become one with the universe
we first need to become one with the
self and you could say they're the same
right can you say a little bit more
about that how that was um
yeah kind of played out in your own
experience
because i think again this is where we
go when we die right we we become
nothing
yeah simultaneously we become everything
yeah
well the experience was
to become one with all of existence you
know we would say to become one with god
to become one with the universe to
become one
with one
uh
we can't do that if we're not one within
ourselves if if we have unintegrated
pieces of shadow or ego fragments or
untouchable wounds or bruises
so when you when you move into intimacy
with life
life itself brings these unintegrated
pieces to the surface so you can make
your peace with them and so you can
reabsorb them so you can be
become whole and coherent within your
own being
because
how could you become one with life
if you're not one with yourself
and so it's not you know just these
things develop synergistically the
deeper your experience of oneness with
the life the deeper your experience of
oneness with yourself until they're
stopped
until these divisions just they
disappear inside of yourself and i think
one of the wonderful qualities we
appreciate about awakened beings
is their is their integrity is their
oneness their sense of deep relaxation
within themselves
which is a
a
outgrowth
of their intimacy with life itself
and
you know and isn't that isn't that
fantastic the way it yet again this
reiterates
the process of reiteration itself that
by learning
to in fact embrace ourselves and again
talk about practical my tree
loving-kindness learning
to in a certain way unite befriend
every aspect of our usually
disenfranchised
spectrum of our being all the parts that
we reject that we then
throw into the unconscious mind that
keeps a large part of the unconscious
mind going and so therefore to me chris
it's like when we understand
the divine nature of
reality which includes the divine nature
of their own but the entire spectrum of
my being
that what without this framework
would be considered the shadow elements
the thing the parts of ourselves that we
don't want to embrace
that we that therefore we spend our
lives in a certain very um sophisticated
avoidance strategy if we understand
through this few
say yes befriend every aspect of your
own being i mean again like with death
this radically changes the way we relate
to the unwanted so-called
aspects of our own spectrum we're being
right here and right now
that we learn how to open open and say
yes to whatever takes place and then
that type of integration and i love this
interjection of the integrity we feel
people
then leads to
fundamental integration with the
so-called outside world altogether
yeah
and one of the one of the last pieces of
course well recognized in the spiritual
traditions
is the importance of giving up private
enlightenment
you know because that's just spiritual
shadow
so that the more you know everything you
do for others is part of is your
awakening and everything you do for
yourself including
trying to become enlightened uh it gets
in your way yeah yeah yeah this again
this brings the social nexus of the path
into play which i love what you write
about in your book that we tend to think
and i think provisionally so
if we look at the term hinayana in its
kind of
pedagogical approach there's a lot to be
said about
click start at home start where you are
clean up with your stuff but the near
but the near enemy of that is then
you become a little bit myopic a little
bit nearsighted and and for me i say
this with is part of my path i mean on
one level i'm the happiest one i'm down
in my study writing being my nerd and on
retreat but then like i did my long
retreat by design
with others you can't wake up without
others and therefore then
others become your path
so the we aspect the social cultural
aspect i think this is incredibly
important i speak from my own experience
because otherwise
then the solitary um
path the the the solitary realizing path
can become a real trap that that again
in the narrative of opening opening
we then work with the people that press
our buttons we've installed those
buttons so that's interesting but
bringing bringing you know i had a
little run in this morning with the guy
who cuts my lawn
and i paid very close attention to that
i i said oh
first of all i capitulated to my habit
patterns it was like oh crap there was
that again
and then as i stepped away for a second
i said oh my gosh that was padmasambhava
teaching me
about patients and so to me
as i come out and i come out of my
really long three-year retreat
my aspiration now is to enter lifetime
retreat with this view
that all these annoying again that's
just my projection
all these annoying aspects of my reality
now those are my path and i love this
because
there's tremendous power and tradition
and path is it's traditionally put forth
but there's also colossal enemies and
one of these is just that is that you i
can only do this one all the atmospheric
conditions are right in my own life
right
and as the world is going to crap right
now i think this becomes a little bit
more helpful for us to bring this kind
of view to so-called unwanted
experiences so that we can bring those
onto our own path realizing that they
are our path
yeah
yep
so anyway it's like you're interviewing
me i need to back up a little bit
i get so excited i can't help myself
with your permission chris i want to
transition into what again i thought was
um
just such a dazzling section in your
book
let's talk a little bit more if you
would
about the the light the the diamond
luminosity you mentioned several times
early on
this this
phenomena of light
this is to me
among the most profound aspects of the
whole shebang and so if if you can maybe
walk us through
your exploration of this light
and how it worked with you on the path
to introduce you to i think is this this
fundamental kind of matrix of reality
well this transition took place 15 years
into my work
so i had already gone through ego death
i had gone through the ocean of
suffering of collective suffering
i had navigated through
archetypal reality
both the sort of platonic archetypes and
um the tissue of our and of our species
mind the tissue of the human psyche
and then had been taken into this year
of incredible blessings of
of experiences of oneness of shunyata
emptiness of self
cosmic love primal void
you know i felt
profoundly existentially
complete i mean i
i felt like i had been asked to give
something in the ocean of suffering work
and i gave it and the universe had just
rewarded me with just a cascade of
blessings that left me feeling
profoundly existentially complete i mean
i had been given a deep experience of
and a new understanding of reincarnation
that transcended
classical you know eastern
understandings of reincarnation i had
been taken into the birth of the diamond
soul i've been given many visionary
experiences of where humanity was going
in the future human and i reviewed these
things just to sort of give a context it
and along the way i had experienced
light
many times in different modalities in
different forms
and then
in the
i came into a time when i went through
yet one more
a very very intense death process which
took an entire session
and then the next session i began
immediately and trust transported into
the fruition portion of the session in
which i was taken into this
light that was beyond any light that i
had experienced before it dissolved into
a luminosity that was
absolutely spellbinding and intoxicating
and in my notes i called it
the death state because
it i entered it
in a form of dying which was
uh an ultimate form of dying at a key
point i was surrounded by a swirling
circle a disc
that had contained all the moments of my
life
and i would fall from the center into
this circle and touch
one of some aspect of my life and i
would instantly die into the state of
luminosity and then be brought back to
the center and fall in a different
direction touching another different set
of experiences and as soon as i did i
would instantly be taken into this death
state and this went over and over
happened over and over until eventually
um
there was no going and coming there was
just
a permanent abiding or at least a
session abiding in this transcendent
luminosity the death state
uh
i would say ecstasy
and it's true
but it's it's a
different than earlier forms of ecstasy
it just the the most striking
characteristic of it for me
was its clarity clarity clarity clarity
i mean it was the context within which
all thinking and all feeling took place
but in itself it was hyper hyper hyper
clear
breathtakingly clear just took my breath
away and i understood
the teachings that
even just touching something like this
for one
second
dissolves
thousands of years of wandering around
in the shadows of samsara it
and i as i came to understand it
um
this was what i
understood to be extrasome sorry reality
and a particularly
intense version of extra samsaric
reality at first i thought of it in
terms of samboga kaya because of the
extreme bliss of it but as i really went
back to the sources and studied them
more carefully i came to associate it
with dharmakaya the clear light of
absolute reality
the next session when i went back
of course
all i wanted to do was get back into
this condition i had no interest in
exploring the other dimensions that i
had gone into
but i did wasn't taken back into this
experience and uh i wasn't taken back
for another year five more sessions
very intense purification very intense
kind of cleansing and healing other
things going on and it was after a year
that i went into the diamond luminosity
for the second time
and this is what happened over the next
several years that it would take about a
year of very very intense work
and then i would die awake and again
into the diamond luminosity
the second time i went into the diamond
luminosity was the deepest experience of
it that i had any time in any of my
sessions
and it was in that
deep immersion
that i had my cosmological vision
completely
reversed and turned upside down
i had the experience of a reality of
light beyond the diamond luminosity
light i
were my
field pivoted i saw a reality far far in
the distance that was just exquisitely
beautiful light a ray of light hit me
and it completely shattered me
uh and i called it the absolute light
you know it was a light beyond even
diamond luminosity and in that one
second i understood
that it's an infinite progression and i
had to give up completely the idea of
ever coming to some type of end state
because always my spiritual tradition
had taught me there were end states
that's why i was doing this work to
reach home or to become one with god or
to become
um
you know one with the universe and some
fundamental you know dissolve into the
metacosmic void
and i began to realize with that instant
i realized no it's an infinite
progression
and
death will keep coming back as long as
you keep pushing because
you're never going to reach the end of
it
at that point
in the the next time i went into the
death into the diamond luminosity and
the fourth and final time i went into
the diamond luminosity i wasn't going
deeper into the diamond luminosity but
the diamond luminosity was crunching
itself more deeply
into my being
and all the lessons were shifting and
pivoting around that it was dissolving
the structure of my body and i could
feel it crunching itself into my
cellular makeup and in a very very
intense
physical
detoxification purification processes
and then this eventually culminated in
uh the fourth session
into the in the experience of
giving me an initiation into the buddha
nature into the pure nature of mind
and
i began to understand that
that
magnificent
reality which has no beginning it has no
end it always is always has been
we never have stepped out of it we never
step into it it is the
it is the abiding foundation of all
existence
that is in a sense the embodied
diamond luminosity it is it is the
closest i've come to uh to experiencing
what diamond luminosity is like in the
body
my other experiences of diamond
luminosity were diamond luminosity as
they exist as an
extra physical reality an extra some
sort of reality
but this was
an experience of pure light
as the foundation
of my very physical existence
okay that was the last time i
experienced the diamond luminosity from
there i went through a couple of
experiences then the final vision in the
70th session and then
basically the the consciousness guiding
my work wrapped it up
gave me a last set of instructions and
sent me on my way
oh i just want to take 15 seconds to
pause and just digest that a little bit
um
[Music]
i understand i've been digesting it for
20 years
because
the ineffable and enormity of it it this
this it's a wonderful
is you're sharing this with me chris and
by the way thank you so much for
trusting to do that
i i find this very interesting
dance between
kind of the mythical poetic aspect of my
being and rendering
just bathing in the artistry of what you
shared versus okay
formulating
whatever um in terms of my references
and so
i mean on one level i i'd almost
hesitate to say anything because what
can one say without just kind of
literally watering it down distorting it
but but with your understanding chris of
of buddhist nomenclature because i i
remember in your book
you also shared
somewhat interesting synchronicity
won the diamond lucid luminosity was
introduced to you in this way literally
almost same same day kind of thing the
vajrayana
then became
part of your journey and your path and
so using that languaging is very
interesting for me
when you say these things
i i find it very very interesting
humbling
exploration of of my referencing um
in real capacity or lack thereof to
understand it okay like for instance oh
that sounds like the dharmaka oh that
sounds like the dharma dhatu and i
really hesitate to say that because on
one level
you i think you understand it shrink
wraps the enormity of what you're saying
into these
names but on another level
we can sit here in silence or we can do
the best we can with language to talk
about something that transcends language
and so we do we can't yeah so with that
said would you
would you would you resonate with your
understanding
of the buddhist tradition and
descriptions of of someone analogous
states clear light mind is that another
quality that comes in that could say
this
you use the term diamond luminosity
interesting vajrayana is the diamond
path but using and again without any
violation of your own personal
experience
are there other um tibetan languages or
buddhist
terms that would relate to what you
experienced that you could say that
really sounds like the dharma dhatu
you've used dharmakaya before
but again i'm trying to simply
relate using my reference structures to
what you're sharing
i'm yes i'm there are i mean clear light
mind to me is maybe closer to
uh the nature of mind in term that
quality and this is
i still
i still am digesting i'm still trying to
appreciate some of the differences
between
the diamond luminosity as an extra some
sorry reality and then the diamond
luminosity as at the foundation of
pneumonicala existence
uh so there certainly are many
correlations and uh
again all honor to the great beings who
have explored these dimensions much more
deeply
than i've been able to so i mean always
always
a humble student truly humble student of
the great teachers in this respect
uh i put the names as best as i can to
clarify or to qualify but you're right i
mean it's tricky because you can this
can get shrink wrapped and that just
stops the mystery and just lets the mind
back in where it really doesn't belong
so let me just give this a step into a
little different framework
the universe is 13.7 billion years old
our planet is about four and a half
billion years old
when we plot the the evolving structure
of homo
you know we go through homo
erectus homo sapiens you know the
various stages we got the big brain the
50 increase in our brain about a hundred
thousand years ago
uh self-awareness begins to emerge
you know along the way
and about three to five thousand years
ago we began to develop the technology
the spiritual technology that allows us
to concentrate our minds and bring us
down
into that part of our being where
we are not of the private self but we
touch the life of the world
we touch that which is universal and
there's this tremendous aha this
awakened sense and we've applied all
sorts of names to that experience of our
true nature our essential nature
now
what whatever this is and i think you
and i have a pretty good sense of what
that experience is what this is
it is the tip of the iceberg
of
the unfolding
the intentional exquisite unfolding of
this trance
extraordinary consciousness that we
might call divinity or maybe not want to
call it divinity
uh
this unfolding which has been gestating
in creation for
13.7 billion years and that's only in
this big bang we don't know how many
other expansions and contractions of
earlier universes precede this
particular big bang explosion we don't
know
i mentioned this just to
underscore
the enormity the profoundness
of
the reality within which awakening takes
place
and the reality within which even deeper
and deeper and deeper awakenings take
place as have been recognized by our
spiritual traditions
our spiritual additions are only three
four five thousand years old and that's
a lot of time for an incarnating soul to
to penetrate into
the deeper texture of existence
but
if we were to go forward in time a
hundred thousand years and that's a wink
of cosmic time but if we went forward a
hundred thousand years surely
reasonably we would expect our great
spiritual teachers to be having deeper
experiences of the universe than our
best spiritual teachers today are
capable of having because it's it's an
ongoing developmental process of
exploring the deep mystery so on the one
hand i want to honor and affirm
the
categories and descriptions
of the beings who have lived up to this
point in time
and i place my experiences at their feet
and i
i seek their guidance and understanding
what has taken place but just as the
absolute light
came from a reality far beyond whatever
the diamond luminosity is
likewise
evolution is continuing evolution is
developing
and we are nowhere near
even 10 percent
of human development
and so i would expect an almost demand
that we
expect
deeper and deeper and deeper
capacities for spiritual experience to
continue to emerge
so
on the one hand
we want to use the categories to to help
us hold on to illumine understand
on the other hand we don't want to
shrink wrap them
we want to stay open and staying open in
this way i think
is to stay open into is to
stay open to a deeper intimacy
with the beloved
to stay open to the light that is the
light that gives birth to the world
second by second
that's real that's exquisite and what
comes to mind again is this wonderful
kind of fundamental archetypal narrative
of openness where on one level
the invitation here is an ideological
openness that that we can very easily
again the near enemy of tradition like
you i have tremendous
oh my goodness tremendous allegiance
respect for tradition
but if tradition isn't you know i think
you understand this in the best sense of
the word it isn't modernized
without being edited and distorted then
it can become ossified um you can reify
even the tradition and then we become
closed around our ideologies and belief
systems and so what
i hear you saying that i really
appreciate is this idol ideological
openness let's let's keep even open to
that
but chris if i might a a question of
clarity and then
um
a few other things when you when you use
the word extra samsaric that that is not
a term that's in my common vocabulary
what what do you mean when you talk
about the light as extra do you mean
post trans-samsaric what do you mean by
extra samsaric i mean beyond the bardo
beyond all the layers of the bardo
beyond all samsara
at a place where
the patterns of cyclic existence
have been eclipsed
and my sense of it is that in between
you know physical reality and the
rhythms of physical reality when we die
we enter into various patterns of bartle
reality yes various spiritual states
but eventually
that has many many many layers thousands
of layers but one can go beyond that in
what is the nature of reality that's
beyond the bardo existence yeah uh the
buddha refused to describe it very
wisely right it says you know just
experience it for yourself and you know
and
my sense is that outside of that
uh what happens in the upper bardo and
the light gets brighter and brighter and
brighter until you move into a world
which is all light
it's just all light and the quality of
light
is is
it's different
because it's trans bardo i mean
all individualized existence
and here i have to be careful because
uh
i for one
do not
see individuality as the
enemy of spiritual awakening because
when we stabilize
deep deep spiritual awakening our
individuality is limit liberated not
extinguished so i don't want to say that
in the domain of extrasome sorry
luminosity there is no individuality but
it is an extraordinarily
um
translucent or an extraordinarily
transparent
individuality
yeah i'm going to make it a practice to
just pause
and work with my usually incredibly
habituated reflex
to fill the space after you make these
amazing statements because i want to
rest
in in the somatic impact of what you're
sharing and not capitulate to my usual
intellectual contractive
predispositions which i don't think pay
respect and honor to what we're trying
to discuss here
um
but let me ask you this chris so when
this is very interesting i mean there's
so many
very profound
principles being
explored and even challenged here so i'm
wondering how
what you're sharing with
this and i was i was probably a surprise
when i read this as you were when you
experienced it
the the dissolution of the so-called
omega point that there isn't some final
destination
um and i'm wondering how
you might reconcile or balance what you
experience as this
endless evolutionary unfolding with
things so speak quorum quote
like the changeless nature and and the
reason i mentioned this is one way that
i've played with this and again
wonderful to be open challenged along
these fronts is that on one level
emptiness in this case emptiness is
dharmakaya emptiness doesn't evolve
form evolves
and so i'm wondering how that lands with
you when when the buddhist tradition
talks about buddha nature is changeless
nature how can something change and
evolve
that doesn't have form that's
an oxymoron
form evolves not emptiness so
how does that land with you how do you
again it's like oh hey they
we're getting down to the razor's edge
of everything here
so
how do you is that a dissonance with you
or where how do you play with that
it's i don't feel it as a dissonance
and it is a deep mystery which i don't
pretend to have to fathom in any
profound
you know way so i'll just share
a few bits and pieces
[Music]
on those occasions when i have
relaxed into
fallen into been drawn into
the unchanging condition
the unchanging reality
the reality within which everything
arises and passes away
and it itself
is uh not impacted at all
it is it appears to be
the fertile
emptying the fertile void i want to hold
back emptiness there the fertile void
from with in which all
uh existence springs
now if we then step into
the
existence that springs from within this
cosmic
fertile
emptiness or void
what's happening and we just look at the
big bang and we look at the magnificent
story of the
ex the explosion of energy and the
congealing into matter and the formation
of galaxies and the formation of solar
systems and sun life and then emergence
of life and the emergence of self and
then self-awareness and so on and so
forth clearly existence seems to be
going somewhere
and it seems to just delight in
in the in form and the unfolding and
complexification and making self-aware
and awakening and and empowering and the
the empowering of the soul as our former
life memories become conscious and we
wake up to our
100 000 year identity not just our 100
year identity so form is going somewhere
and that which is driving form is going
somewhere and it's it's just the
magnificent creativity
of the universe and that's why you know
the mind of the universe because i
didn't want to call it god and that's
why i'm not too really comfortable with
the word entheogen because that has
theos and our understandings of god are
so limited so
i i yield into
um
the cosmologist language of the universe
because we measure the universe in light
years six million million
miles and it's
billions of light years across that bag
that huge and yet
when we right now as we become
self-conscious as this you know complex
biped and we drop our awareness down to
the center of our self what we find is
this magnificent
reality
which feels to be
unchanging and yet it seems to be at the
center of everything which is changing
so it it seems to be clearly kind of a
both end
so the divinity if we use the word
divinity for it the the divinity which
delights in existence
has
at least
and i don't know whether this is
ultimately true because we may just be
scratching the surface even now
but
its nature
that infinite nature that it seems to be
at some level unchanging
at the center perpetual change
and that's kind of the best i can do
about it i think it's fantastic and
it's again completely
revelatory of
um
conceptual frameworks just because
concept can't relate to this seeming
paradox
it doesn't mean reality doesn't abide by
those paradoxes right it's only apparent
it's only a paradox to the conceptual
mind yeah
it has no problem
exactly exactly
it's only when we
try to shrink rapid that we enter into
the world of paradox and irony and on
one level to me this is beautiful
because this is in fact
one of the ways that i've come to
register this marvelous
dissonance isn't the right word but
when when duality tries to open and wrap
itself around non-duality which of
course they cannot do
one characteristic of that is in fact
this irony paradox uh things that like
the niels bohr i love what he
introduced the notion of complementarity
you know that phenomena can be it's not
either
or it's and they can be both light and
particle we can you can be both chris
beige
and the cosmos who says you can't be
both if aristotle says we can't be both
you know we live in his and we live in
his world
and so
one other really important thing for me
here chris is
there does seem to be we talked i
believe
very briefly about this last time i want
to return to it because this is
important to me in terms of path quality
in fact very notion of path
on one level there seems to be a
suggestion in your languaging
um in in what you're sharing here what
you shared in your book
this quality of return
i i want to return to the beloved i want
to return to the light longing to return
and perhaps
this also lies in with this whole notion
of of paradox but
i'm also wondering how we can play with
that
with what to me seems the more immediate
aspect of this is a large part i
mentioned this because this is a big
part of my current path
is is really decimating the notion of
path itself that
how fair is it in fact to say the issue
of return is a provisional
approach description
and then perhaps a more absolute
approach would be around recognition
that you're not you don't really need to
return to anything
the the issue is recognition and
self-liberation so does that somehow
speak to you when when you reference
longing to return to the mother to the
beloved to the clear light
that again denotes this subtle
dualism i have to return
versus no i just need to remove the
cataracts of confusion open the aperture
of my heart and mind and the there the
light the mother is right in front of me
right now yeah
i absolutely i think that's a fair
observation
return
implies um
absence
and the nature of union dissolves
absence and so it dissolves the category
of return and it encourages a different
set of categories because uh
it's like the eternal here the eternal
now it's just here all the time
and so i i think that's absolutely true
that it's a
it is
it fits at one level but then it
dissolves itself at a deeper level
now
having said that
again i want to contextualize this
within
my particular
journey
which is not the same
as
the journey of spiritual awakening
so
the journey of spiritual awakening is
this art and craft of awakening into
releasing all the constrictions of the
present self so that we can live in a
state of an abiding transparency or
shunyata to life as it flows through us
like wind blowing through the trees
and we simply
we rest in the
abiding present
of the universe as it continues to
unfold
cosmological exploration is different
it's kind of like getting into a rocket
ship
and going into a different at a
different solar system in the galaxy
maybe even going into a different galaxy
altogether
and
and that is
pushing
the
the capacity of experience pushing
the limits of awareness so that
the condition of remembering reaches
beyond
even
the nature of mind it's not about simply
if if i were had been seeking only to
awaken into the abiding present
i would have adopted a completely
different strategy i think i think myron
stilleroff's recommendation of working
with very very low doses of lsd in
meditation practice would be a better
strategy but the the strategy i used
working with very very high doses of lsd
pushes consciousness so far beyond
enlightenment and and i say that humbly
trying not to confuse the categories not
like i'm enlightened and i'm more than
enlightened not like that at all but
it's going beyond the state
of
the abiding condition of emptiness into
the unchanging reality underneath it's
going deeper into physical reality
deeper into consciousness reality where
does consciousness come from what are
the prototypes that inform the very
structure of time and space the
prototypes that inform the nature of
of um
archetypal consciousness within the
human psyche what are what are the very
forms that
uh
that are giving birth
to time and space
what is the light that gave birth to the
world not just the gave birth to our
moment to moment exhaustion but the
light that gave birth to the universe
from that
condition there is a sense of return
entering that condition and then coming
back from that condition and that's why
i i think what you say is absolutely
true
within a spiritual context as we usually
mean spiritual return as an oxymoron
it's better to use other categories but
from within a context of cosmic
exploration
maybe there's a place because
i personally cannot imagine
how i could personally maybe other
beings could and can and
god bless them but i cannot imagine how
i could personally live
in some of the places that i have
touched and so i can only visit them as
a as a
visitor as a sojourner and so i come
back
and i
try to bring back as much as i can i try
to cultivate whatever i can of that
condition in my daily life
but i know
that the vast majority of that reality
i will never be able to bring back
in this lifetime maybe a hundred
lifetimes from now maybe so i don't know
but i will never be able to and
therefore in that context return has a
certain
ring of truth to it
wow with again
several things that come to mind here
um
and again i i
you're a philosopher uh
it's interesting this is a very
compelling term for me
um
i think in many instances things become
philosophy because they haven't become
direct experience yet so then we use
that slight pejorative
thing that's philosophy and so
what you're sharing here is is really
quite something and
i wouldn't say this is this this is
simply to discuss it i almost said the
word challenge it but that's not the
right word
to discuss this
that what comes to mind and so educate
me teach me
are again i i'm completely um
admissive of of my
frameworks because i honestly unless i
sit here in silence i don't have a
choice right
silence is the language of god all else
is poor translation
yeah i'm a poor translator but i'm doing
my best so when you something that that
rubs me and i love the rub because
that's what creates the pearl
how do you
reconcile teach me
um
when you talk about this this difference
and this is foundational for you but it
does challenge me
when you talk about in fact the
difference between the individual versus
the cosmic because let's let's take for
instance the reference point that does
speak to me chris that that i'm finding
some refuge in here that maybe is
limited of advaita vedanta for instance
that
how do you reconcile
the duality that's inherent in your
statement that separates
individual from cosmological because if
in fact you're saying that that dil
still does imply a duality and so
for me i
i'm wrestling playing dancing with
this idealistic i'm you know in buddhism
as you know
chittamatra yogachara
the world is his heart mind spirit there
you're what you're saying here seems to
intimate
still some other cosmological versus
individual and so how do you
work play with that
in terms of the the what you were
talking about earlier reconcile that
with oneness now because on one level i
seem to hear a monism for you yeah
but now you're talking about dual aspect
modeism again i feel like i think you
understand it on one level it's like oh
please don't don't become a philosopher
again yeah right yeah here i am
you're talking about such beautiful
stuff and here i am you will aspect
modernism oh please just go away but i i
want to understand this a little bit
more so that when i leave this i'm not
merely left with a wonderful which is
probably the best
this wonderful transmission from your
experience but
how do you play with that is there in
fact an inherent cosmological dualism
when you say
individual versus cosmic versus the
monism that you seem to suggest
throughout your journey yeah i think i
don't see any dualism in it and if there
is a dualism it's not of my making it's
of the universe is making
the universe begins as one
in some fundamental core
you know
pre-big bang
instant big bang it begins this one and
it manifests diversity i didn't choose
that you didn't choose this we didn't
choose it the universe chose to manifest
diversity
we are part of that diversity
and the universe chose to empower in its
process of self-emergence it chose to
empower life to become self-aware and
self-empowering
so re the soul grows and grows and grows
the soul is that consciousness which
holds the awareness experience of all of
our lifetimes multiple lifetimes so
we're expanding we're growing and
growing and growing
we didn't choose that
we didn't make ourselves
we are discovering a world that was
designed before we even billions of
years before we even showed up on the
scene so we show up in the scene and we
begin to try to make sense of it and we
begin to try to understand these things
and one thing is very clear that there
is a part and there is a whole
there are many many parts and there is
there is the whole and when when our
spiritual experience deepens we have
experiences of the whole
and at the same time
we experience ourselves as a part and
how do we reconcile those
i think we reconcile them with a deep
understanding of emptiness
and emptiness here is simply emptiness
of self that when we
open to the wholeness of life
it's immediately obvious that there is
no separate self we are part of life
we are an abiding part of life we are a
bubble in the ocean we are part of the
process
that's why to me oneness and emptiness
are two different sides of the same coin
it's simply the experience that i'm
living in breathing every molecule of my
being every thought of my being every
consciousness every soul everything i am
is part of the manifestation of the
universe i am the universe in that
respect and yet i'm obviously just a
little bitty part a little bitty planet
a little bitty solar system in a galaxy
within multiple building two trillion
galaxies so we are part and we are we
are our nature is the is the totality of
the whole
in that respect
there is no duality except the duality
which is forced upon us by the
conditions of life but there's no
ontological duality there's a functional
duality but i i don't even like to use
philosophical categories of metaphysical
categories because that traps us within
human thought in the history of human
thought and the history of human thought
particularly in the western
philosophical tradition is so
constrained it it is not rooted in deep
experience it's rooted in
sensory experience and highly
intellectually refined sensory
experience which is why i think of
course when we turn the to the
contemplature traditions different
philosophical insights emerge or
different insights emerge because it's a
deeper experience and i think that's the
significance of psychedelics for the
west as a philosopher they not only give
us new clinical categories and clinical
insights and opportunities to heal the
personal psyche but as a philosopher
they open up the entire world
of cosmic experience and so
as we try to digest those experiences
and articulate them and understand them
it it allows us to draw from
a deeper set of experiences which
allows us to basically entertain a
deeper set of ideas so i i
i have a training as philosophy of
religion and i point to that only to
differentiate myself from the good
psychologists who are working in
clinical context
but i don't speak like a philosopher do
i and and i i don't do the things that
philosophers do and they would disown me
in a minute they all they do disown me
you know so
to me there's no duality there's a
functional duality which is basically
just a bubble
on the ocean of time in existence
that that's a incredible response to
basically a very subtle thorny issue
one
question chris from the very outset
is when you
had the experience of the diamond
diamond luminosity
post sashing post meditation
where does that light go
what is the relationship of that light
to the phenomenal display of the world
and appearance
does the world emerge
from that light is the world
an expression of that light or both so
so you you seem to not seen you you
entered return to
a luminosity state and
when you so to speak came down came out
of it
this world appeared what is the
relationship of the discovery of that
light to the perhaps covering up or
that's my languaging where does that
light go
and how is it what is its relationship
to appearance
yeah good question which i'm not
competent to answer but i i take some
pointers from science and some pointers
from my experience the light doesn't go
anywhere of course the light is always
there we gain access to it
for a period of time
but uh we withdraw from the light into
you know plato would say the world of
shadows but to me that denigrates the
beauty the magnificence of physical
reality
scientists tell us that all over the
world is made of molecules molecules are
made out of atoms atoms are made out of
subatomic particles ultimately we get
down to quarks in the end
matter is made out of light yeah correct
so if the scientists are telling us that
matter is made out of light and if we go
into our mind and drop into the deepest
levels of our mind and we encounter
light it's like well
you know there's that this is such a
synergy there
so my understanding is that the light of
doesn't disappear the light is
manifesting the physical world the light
is manifesting as the physical world
that means
when we really sit
with the whole trying to hold it all
together we get to experience the
physical world
as the manifestation
of the unified being
of being
which is light
it manifests and everywhere we touch the
world we find genius
in the creation of solar systems and how
stars live and die and in dna
and in ecosystems everywhere we're
touching the world we find layers and
layers and layers of genius and if we
keep digging down deep enough we'd fall
into quantum reality you know dark
energy dark matter light they call it
dark energy dark matter but it really
should be light energy light matter you
know light light light
yeah so it if i live
if i get depressed and i live in a state
of sadness i related live in a state of
disconnection then that's only that's
only my own mind throwing up
shadows of illusion
but when i'm clear
when i return to clarity
i see the world as a miracle
yeah manifestation and i love that the
prophet muhammad said that the only
miracle he would cite
for the truth of what he was teaching
was the miracle of the universe
in in
isn't it worth
again i'm sure you know this but perhaps
it's worth
just re reinstating that when you say i
experience it
perhaps
it experiences itself right there
on one level yes we use that languaging
but even then it's almost it's it is
impossible
um to talk about this without stumbling
into this it's it's this as you know
reflexive awareness of the light itself
and so yeah i'm wondering chris is it
fair to say that then
i i'm i'm i mean this is so
integral to the whole thing it's
literally enveloped in the term
enlightenment this is a big deal
and and so i i of all the
teachings both in in physics cosmology
and spirituality the ones that captivate
me the most that that i find the most
ineffably profound
are in fact these teachings of
luminosity
which inseparable from emptiness is
emptiness luminosity
is it is it
fair to say that that what we know is
our self-sense
when we condense and contract from the
unity i'm using my languaging here
please correct me if i'm wrong
from the unity
of that formless light
back into a reified form in the worlds
that that arises from that contraction
that that that's a process of
dissociation that on one level
we
again again the narrative of openness
when we completely open die
to
reality it reveals itself in this
undifferentiated ineffable unity of of
light
and that when we can condense
reincarnate back into form
the minute we do that
the world appears as self another
and we simply lose memory we lose the
recollection of this this fundamental
um
expression of the beloved as as this
body of infinite luminosity and
emptiness
i think there is a a sad way of doing
that and then there's a happy way of
doing that or so maybe there's a
pathological way but then there's an
entirely healthy way and imagine it this
way i mean let's use god language
temporarily just because it's kind of
handy
uh if if we were to become one with god
for an hour
and if god is the essence and totality
of all life forms
then we would be becoming one with all
life forms
and just imagine the nearby life forms
in your neighborhood that that would
involve becoming one with
all the beetles and ants and grasses and
seeds and cockroaches i mean all the
human beings and all their manifest
forms there's so many layers and layers
and layers and layers of life so when we
say about well we're becoming one with
god we don't really mean oh my god we
became one with the billions and
billions of ants that are you know right
in my neighborhood but in fact if god is
one if all life is one in god then
that's what it involves so what happens
i think is that we do become one with
one we kind of re connect to the one
but the happy way is that when we come
back i don't come back into being an ant
i don't come back into being a toad or
bird i come back into being chris a
human being
and there is a happy and healthy way
in which i come back into
this individual life form which
recognizes that its essence
is the same as the essence of those ants
and birds and toads no better no
different it's more complicated but the
essence is the same there is that
profound kinship with all of existence i
happen to be a human bubble they are
other kinds of bubbles together we make
up the unified existence of the totality
less seeing in celebration
we work together
we didn't choose it we didn't create it
we are awakening up within it
it is the design of a deeper
intelligence a deeper organization
that's that's manifesting itself in
joyful diversity
we
we can enjoy the diversity we can
acknowledge it and be comfortable within
it and i don't think there's anything
pathological about it in fact there's an
ecstatic joy
in celebrating being a human being
in the in the now
if we exalt our humanness at the expense
of other life forms and we're willing
for them to go extinct in order to allow
us to buy a bigger you know
bigger and better and whatnot of course
there's a steep deep pathology there
but when it's truly liberated
our our individuality is recognized as a
gift
just an extraordinary gift and a
responsibility
we have to handle that responsibility in
order to protect the well-being of all
the life-forms that we are part of that
that are around us
then
the deep the sense of
our common ground the sense of the
common ground out of which all life
emerges i think deepens and deepens and
deepens
uh and so i don't really this is again a
sort of eco-psychology and
eco-spirituality
we can't really awaken
as a as a separate self without
simultaneously awakening as an earth
self an earth being
yeah that's that's fantastic and
talk about applicability
sometimes it's easy to think that these
are
kind of elite treasured sterile ivory
tower spiritual experiences but really
these
there's nothing
more practical
more applicable this this is the
farthest from being philosophy this is
the most radical
transformation in view
from which
activism whatever you want to call it
enlightened activity
extraordinarily practical applicable
behaviors and actions arise
spontaneously from this and i think this
also cannot be overstated because
to me my big bug
these days if
if what we're discussing here is it
can't be of a benefit to what's
happening in the world it's irrelevant
and this is far from irrelevant this is
this is absolutely foundational
for this is right view it is the basis
that which you from this from this
foundation
spontaneously without thought
arises the activity that is is
appropriate for this day and age and so
chris as we um wow
let me ask you this
when i when i hear you you talking about
these experiences these are these are
types of samadhi states you're you're
entering
into particular absorption states
like when you're bathing in the light
you become the light that's a type of
that's a luminous samadhi
why does it end
why why
why does post-meditation post sashing
still take place why
why not
abide in that light eternally
um
what brings what's what brings you back
and it seems on a level it's involuntary
right so in a certain way
we're talking about rebirth processes
what
is the rebirth process involuntary due
to
the
unpurified habitual patterns that still
bring us back because of their karmic
power
why why does the samadhi end
yeah
well once again there are some beings
for whom their samadhi does not end but
even those beings experience a movement
in and out you know they
they
live at different levels at different
seconds of every hour
i would say
my samadhi ends because
i'm not i'm a being who cannot sustain
those levels of purity or those levels
of clarity
in my current condition so the habits of
consciousness reassert themselves the
habits of
my embodiment reassert themselves and i
once again am kind of
looking at the world through
the levels of awareness that i can
manage in my embodied existence but in a
sense there is a again
we
spirit is the goal spiritual awakening
or is the goal cosmological exploration
if the goal is spiritual awakening then
there is a way in which we can
realistically aim to enter into a kind
of samadhi
which is abiding
and
allows us to live with a profound sense
of freedom within
the context of life
if the if the experiential trajectory is
cosmological exploration
then
the burden of that
at least as in this path that i practice
and i'm just let's just stay there and
not talk about the comparative other
paths
the burden of that discovery is that
it's temporary the burden is that it's a
samadhi state or maybe even samadhi is
not the right word for it
to go beyond to experience the future
to experience the future of humanity in
a realistic graphic sense to experience
the purpose of time-space existence and
a profound
expansion of time that allows you to
span
millions and millions of years of
history and understand and absorb it and
to take it in i mean i don't
how could one possibly live in that
condition
and have breakfast
really
so
that's just you know
if you want to understand those things
here's a way of doing it but then you
have to you have to come back and now
you have to live in
my 72 year old self and i have to cut
the grass and i have to do my things
uh and that's okay because if if you do
it well
there is a happy way
of coming back
and integrating
and recognizing
the limits of what you experienced it's
a temporary condition
no big deal not to make too much of it
learning more as i go
you know just
so there's a there's a healthy way
and then there were all sorts of
unhealthy ways of doing it
but hopefully healthy way it is there is
an abiding
calm
and trust
an abiding trust in the wisdom of the
universe
in its
self-emergent glory
yeah
would it be fair to say
chris therefore that
i mean i i hear
rebirth reincarnation
we're basically talking about this
fundamental process
is it fair to say
that rebirth really
takes place in two dimensions
of experience the degree of openness we
can tolerate
um in other words what what there
thereby can bring the end of and this is
important term for me
that differentiates my understanding of
buddhism from other traditions
what ends the process of
involuntary rebirth
is in fact the ability to
coming back to this central narrative of
openness
to open open open open to such a due
degree you were so familiar with it
we're so comfortable with it
that fundamentally when that
state
is revealed at the moment of death
we we abide in and as that fundamental
openness and then
when we do return as you know we do so
out of love and manifestation of
compassionate cuckoo phenomena
voluntarily embodying our wisdom not
involuntarily embodying our confusion
and at that point
it's not that rebirth ends
involuntary rebirth ends and just like
you said then the play
lilo rolpa continues
infinitely
out of love and compassion in the
service of others is that a fair way to
share
or express your understanding of of this
again i'm trying to to dance around
um the dissolution of the omega point
right that this is the final goal but on
one level yeah on one level it is a the
final goal for self
the the cessation of that self but then
it's just the beginning of this endless
voluntary display of wisdom and
i think it's a very fair description
i think what ends is the involuntary
nature
of reincarnation and we transition into
voluntary incarnation and with that
comes i mean and i think we our future
incarnations are not the same as our
past incarnations in this respect and
the way i've languished this the way it
was shown me in the sessions is
that
long term or short term i mean in long
term however it manifests itself
intermittently
um
i think in the end we all become tulkus
we all become voluntarily incarnate the
hum when the entire
planet is populated
by
self-consciously incarnated beings
humanity will have transitioned to a new
level
of its evolutionary trajectory and the
way this was presented to me in the
sessions was the re the birth of the
diamond soul so all my former lives at
one point started coming into me coming
into me and
when they hit
they hit a critical mass and they fused
into one and when they fused into one
this diamond light blew out of my chest
and catapulted me into a
deep deep deep state of consciousness
that was
individualized it was individual
consciousness but it was individuality
actualized
in a way that i had no previous
experience of
and i think that that's where humanity
is going all of us are incarnating every
generation billions and billions of
people are incarnating incarnating over
and over again over and over again
sooner or later
the entire species not only becomes
awakened but the entire species gives
birth to this deeper spiritual awareness
which has been gestating inside it all
of this time all these hundreds and
hundreds and thousands of lifetimes
until we awaken into our deeper
awareness which is not just the
awareness of enlightenment the awareness
of awakening but it's the awareness of
our history it's the awareness of our
relationship to the universe it's a
deeper intimacy with the intelligence of
the universe the deeper intimacy with
all life forms on this planet this is
when soul consciousness and i don't mean
soul in a
anti-buddhist way but in a way that's
compatible with shunyata emptiness but
soul consciousness awakens
so that we awaken to the being that we
are
in the community of beings
as they are
on a planet
at this particular stage of its
evolutionary development with billions
of years
ahead of us
and so i i think we're just beginning to
see the edges when we first encountered
enlightenment 5 000 years ago
we called it um
escape moksha we escaped samsara we want
to get out of here but now we're
beginning to understand now we want to
awaken here
and in the awakening here
we
humanity makes a pivot into a new stage
of the evolutionary story
and a not
not just a larger stage but a more
peaceful stage peaceful of heart
non-violent more compassionate more
insightful more creative
that's the kind of planet that i think
we're giving birth to right now and all
of our individual spiritual aspirations
and and pure purification aspirations
and healing aspirations and justice
aspirations all of this are all
organically part of this deeper story
and the deeper stories that humanity is
coming to a point where it no longer has
the liberty
of living at the lower level of maturity
that it's lived at in the past we cannot
afford we can't run a planet run by egos
we have to grow up
and when we grow up
we grow up into this higher form of
spiritual awareness that the spiritual
teachers have been telling us about for
thousands of years but this begins a
turning point in human history
that's what we're trying to give birth
to what i call the future human people
give all sorts of different names to it
we can all feel it in our bones it's
maitreya it's that
higher level of realization that is
working its way
to us
you know that's really really exquisite
and i'm wondering
um if again i understand the languaging
but i'm wondering if um growing down
might be a more appropriate embodied
aspect because the growing up is
again fundamentally moksha escapist
fedex my consciousness to appear land
when it's really
waking down into the majesty
somewhat nice way to start to close
things up
with the integration of your work the
waking down bringing
metabolizing digesting incorporating
literally incorporating bringing into
soma body
yeah this this vast realization but
chris if if you don't mind me being
slight devil's advocate here that's just
from my stance sure i i've
become very interested fascinated for
some decades
with
development structural development not
just not just spiritual
and this is where i like integral
approaches and so
i i i
take utter complete delight in this
vision
and make aspirations that may it be so
that we can all become
cuckoos um but i'm also wondering
again
wishful thinking you talk in your book
about these evolutionary breakthroughs
um when i look at the world and i
i i see what's happening and we can't
even agree
as a society to wear a mask for the
benefit of
each other why
why should there be at this point
something special that would occur like
a meteor
hitting this earth of sanity wisdom and
insight that would shake us from our
collective slumber
and bring us to this collective
evolution and awareness it doesn't seem
to work that way evolution stumbles and
trips along these very painful laborious
long
stretches of time i i revel in what
you're saying but
i'm less optimistic than i used to be
that i look at this world and i put my
finger up to the winds that are blowing
and it doesn't it's not blowing in the
right direction yeah things don't be
getting worse they seem to be getting
raised right so i'm curious outside of
of your experience and that that's
ultimate refuge for you
what else outside of that if there is
anything else
gives you the conviction
to say that that we're heading towards
this evolutionary breakthrough as a
species um can like the big question
these days will we do it in time
i personally am not so sure i try to
retain my optimism yeah but it's
conjecture on my part so i'm curious how
that that
challenge slash rub lands with you
the development doesn't seem to work
this way yeah
outside of my visionary experience i
have nothing to say
i you know we all look at the data we
all see what's going on we see the
stupidity and insanity around us
we see a growing eco crisis series of
eco crises we anticipate the
desertification of the middle america
we see
phantom famine on the horizons already
started but penetrating into middle
class experience slowly
we see the we're told that the oceans a
12-foot rise has already baked into the
into reality
uh unstoppable by 2050 12 feet by 2050
where we can calculate how many billions
of people will be flooded out of where
they live and where i mean
we know we're coming into extremely
difficult times we see the forces of
conservatism we see the reactionary
regressive forces that are manifesting
in politics internationally
we see
higher concentrations of wealth into
smaller and smaller numbers of people
we see
very very dangerous and forbidding
trends and and so
outside of my visionary experience i
have no uh certainty or surety that this
is going someplace good
so
the nature of my
experiences
if there and if there is any
well the nature of my experience is
that starting about
around
1992 93
i started having these consistent
visions coming in completely by surprise
just as i had not anticipated that one
could possibly do any type of
therapeutic work and healing some aspect
of the collective psyche i had no idea
that it was even possible to consider
having insights into humanity's
evolutionary trajectory
but now once i lived with this for years
i began to understand that this is a
natural thing
just as we have as we go deeper within
our personal life we have a deeper
understanding and experience of our
trajectory of our personal life
one can go deep if one lives in service
of the collective one can have a deeper
and penetrating understanding of the
collective trajectory and in that
context my experience has been
consistent over years and years and
years of psychedelic experience and
visionary experience first many years of
basically saying humanity's coming to a
turning point we're coming to a before
and after we're coming into a to a dawn
of something fantastic we're coming to a
genuine spiritual awakening that
everything that he our spiritual
traditions have been describing for the
individual guess what it's not an
individual thing it's a collective thing
this is a collective dynamic the forces
of the collective unconscious are
activated not just my personal
unconscious
and then
at that critical time in 1995
when i had the 55th session and it and
it when i was expecting to be taken back
into the diamond luminosity it dissolved
me into
the collective psyche it dissolved me
into the collective unconscious took me
into deep time into an expanded sense of
time and in that state i experienced
the death and rebirth of humanity i
experienced a global systems crisis that
led to
billions of people billions of people
dying just a total unraveling of
cultures we have known it of
civilization as we've known it a
complete i i experienced our entire
species losing control
of its story losing control of its life
on this planet just being put under
enormous terribly crushing pressure
of death
and destruction
and it looked for time it felt for a
time as this this was an extinction
event that we were really going extinct
as a species
but and i was given no details i wasn't
giving a timeline i wasn't given
anything i was given the experience
of the species
going through
a death event
on this planet all of us together
and then i experienced
that the storm
began to pass the storm began to subside
and those of us who were still alive
picked themselves up and began to
rebuild
and what we were
was different
than what we had been before and what we
be what began to happen was a
synergistic of conscious creativity a
synergistic of compounded freedom a
synergy of compounding insight a new set
of values a new set of understandings a
new set of capacities were manifesting
themselves that humanity as a whole
was going through a process that every
spiritual aspirant has had
knowledge of a complete collapse of
realities they had known it
and a waking up into
a more
spiritually
animated
whole magnificent
beautiful
conscious awareness that humanity was
going through this process
and then in the very in my 70th session
the very very last session once again it
gave me kind of like a capstone
experience where it
took me deep into the future and it
showed
me the archetypal structure
of this future human the archetypal form
of it
and truly i mean it
brings tears to my eyes just to even
remember it to think of it that this is
a
this is a truly
different form of humanity it's like the
best of the best of us in it
our hearts healed our minds opened
outside of my visionary experience i
have no reason for suggesting
what i have suggested
as that humanity is coming to this
turning point this evolutionary pivot
point i know that evolution has dead
ends and you know whole species die off
and whole planets could die off and i
know that there's no cognitively
compelling reason for having hope
and as we enter
the next century as we enter what's
going to happen in this century
we are going to lose hope again and
again and that's why i think it's really
important to have a vision an
understanding of what's taking place at
a deeper level because
it's going to get bad
i mean really
realistically
we could be looking at more than half of
the human population of earth
lost
and we'll watch it on television every
night and it's just it's going to rack
us with terrible pain
but inside we're going to be led to do
things that we would not otherwise do
we're going to be we're going to be
cracked open in this pain and suffering
justice and of meditation
deep meditation justice and deep
psychedelic experience
we will reach deeper into ourselves than
we have ever reached before and we will
accomplish something that we might never
accomplish
without this ordeal of pain
now
the other thing that i was shown in the
55th session was some of the mechanism
responsible for doing this that was and
i was shown this over and over and over
again taken through it and it until i it
was made sure i understood it and i'll
just mention it here and point to the
book and that is it has to do with
the functioning of the collective psyche
and in this
time of accel accelerated and
intensified individual suffering it's
not just our individual psyches that
would be
activated but all of the suffering of
humanity gathers in its process at a
centralized level as more as
morphogenic feel
childreak has helped us understand and
so that
the scenario that was unfolded was
the collective psyche will move into
such a highly energized state that it
will begin to operate as a non-linear
system are far from equilibrium system
and we know something about how physical
systems operate when they enter into
non-linear conditions
they are capable of accelerated change
small perturbations ex produce expanded
outcomes
uh creativity emerges from within the
system in unprecedented way hydrogen and
oxygen combined to produce oxygen i mean
to produce water uh things happen that
are un anticipatable according to a
system operating in linear systems and
this was shown me that this future is
going to take place this pivot is going
to take place
much faster than we could ever imagine
if we used our calculation based upon
the past it's going to take place faster
more quickly it's going to be deeper
than anything that we could imagine in
the past now i i know that sounds like
optimism run amok and i understand and
everybody has to make their own
decisions on this
all i can do is simply hear
report
the vision
and let it go with that and then we're
all in this together you and i and our
children and grandchildren we're all in
this together yeah
yeah i mean it's interesting part of me
um
says may it be so and another part of me
says may it not be so
hmm
but i'm wondering chris as we start to
to
wrap up i know your time is valuable
we've covered so much amazing material
really and
[Music]
um prescriptions
what
uh level
some some things are implied with our
time together
but um
prescriptions what
what to do or in a certain sense not to
do how to bring our individual
empowered
selves or lack thereof to to actually
help this world
both now and and you know for our
ancestors so
some let's let's end on some
prescription notes if we might
in terms of the transition
that i've been describing
someone that i know and love and respect
very dearly
who has thought a great deal about what
we can do
how we can accelerate this process how
we can
remove the worst of the pain and move
into
the this
new future
better quicker is dwayne elgin and his
book choosing earth is a beautiful book
powerful book small book
he lays out what he thinks the next five
decades are going to look like and it's
not a pretty picture it's it's a
frightening picture but he also lays out
a series of prescriptions of
prescriptions for how we can engage this
future how we can bring about
a safe landing how we can change and
engage
socially individually and socially
and i i think he
his advice is worth much more than mine
dwayne elgin choosing earth and he's
giving the book away
you can get a pdf on amazon it's giving
he's giving it away because it's so
important uh he's not trying to hold on
or make money on it himself he's it's
all in service of humanity
i would step also add to that a reminder
that from a reincarnational perspective
each one of us
every one of the thousands and thousands
of listeners in your program and all of
us around the world we chose to be
incarnated at this time in history we
chose to be incarnated at the time and
place that we incarnated with the
talents and challenges that we brought
into this incarnation we are exactly
where we are supposed to be
in order to make a creative offering to
this time in history we don't have to go
look elsewhere the only real question is
do we have the courage to actualize to
activate
the potential that we are standing on
right here right now
once we make that commitment that
our life
my life will count towards the good
then we look around us and we say okay
what needs to happen what what are we
trying to become
and then we put our hands to work and
since we're all different and we all
have different missions and different
agendas some of us are in the medical
field some of us in the political field
and philosophical field and creative
field and hard labor all these things
every
human talent will be required to bring
this about
so it's not a matter of kind of looking
elsewhere it's simply a matter of
looking at where one is already
incarnated to make service
spiritual practice is important facing
the shadow clarifying the shadow
becoming open and individually receptive
community is important not only practice
community but social community uh
learning how to do more with less
sharing restructuring society political
communities really important we see what
happens when ego runs amok in our
politics
all these things are needed all of these
things are important
all we have to do is look around and see
what needs to be done and give ourselves
to it completely
wow
wonderful
um
anything that um you wish i would have
asked
any any
i don't know you covered some serious
territory partner yeah that's been rich
but as we really wrap up
um i mean there's so many summary
statements here
but any any other final thoughts or
questions you
felt should have been directed your way
no you know you mentioned the living
classroom in the beginning and it's not
it's too late to go into a large
excursus but the basic the core of that
book which doesn't mention psychedelics
is the core truth that's manifesting
there is
that consciousness is unified from the
start so that everything we do in our
individual sphere our individual field
radiates out around us 360 degrees it
all of our spiritual practice all of our
actions everything we do
radiates around it touches and interacts
with the consciousness of the beings
around us
knowing this then we take more
responsibility for making sure we're
sending out
you know a positive experience in the
world you know beneficial experience
and we are never ever ever
isolated
from those around us we it may be
invisible it may be subtle you know
but it's always there and the more we
act on that basis
the more we activate the strength of
those sinews
that uh bind us to life and if this is
true of course not just for human beings
other human beings it's true for all the
life forms
that surround us and that that's the
core teaching of the living classroom
that there's an atomistic quality to
teaching and then there's a quantum
quality to teaching so like you and i
have been having kind of a in some ways
an atomistic conversation but we can
trust that there's a quantum
quantum quality to our conversation yeah
yeah a field effect that is that extends
beyond
our our limited self sense which is
illusory in in nature and
when we have these i think it's a
wonderful way to end because really
it invites us to really discover that we
have so much more power than we think in
in both
negative and positive ways and and the
thoughts that we hold the aspirations
the motivations
it's not
just encapsulated in this little ball of
skin it it just it's a pebble radiating
out throughout the cosmos not just this
world and and i think really
understanding that will
empower our ways to benefit the world so
chris yes i i can't thank you enough for
spending so much time with us i it's
really quite remarkable i'm thrilled to
have spent this time with you i've
learned so much i applaud your bravery
your heart um your capacities and doing
this it's marvelous and it's really
being a great benefit so
thank you for the conversation andrew uh
thank you for your work bringing this
conversation and many similar
conversations into the world
conversations change lives
thank you for what you do and just thank
you for the opportunity to talk about
these things together it's been yeah
it's been a delight for me too and like
we talked briefly last time this this i
haven't really thought of it before
the dialogue the conversation the
sharing is is actually a quality of path
itself is new for me and i haven't
really thought of it that way so it's a
wonderful insight of many that you
shared
so um thank you so much for everything
let's do it again with the next book
that comes out
oh no help me
but i'm always happy to have a
conversation with you yeah really yeah
such a delight um until next time thank
you so much for your time good heart
loving blessings love and blessings
thank you
bye